Let's look at a 2nd example where big data
can have a big impact on saving lives.
I mean,
literally saving lives one life at a time.
I collaborated with a number of
world-class researchers in San Diego, and
an industrial group who are dedicated to
improving human health through research
and practice of precision medicine.
What is precision medicine?
It is an emerging area of medicine
targeted toward an individual person.
Analysing her genetics, her environment,
her daily activities so
that one can detect or
predict a health problem early,
help prevent disease and
in case of illness provide the right drug
at the right dose that is
suitable just for her.
Very recently the White House and
the National Institute of Health here
in the U.S. have declared it to be
a top priority area for research and
development for the next decade.
The expected learning
outcome of this video is for
you to give example of sensor,
organizational and
people-generated data used
in precision medicine.
And, explain why the integration of
different kinds of data is critical
in advancing healthcare.
For any technology to
succeed in real life we need
not only a certain level of maturity of
the technology itself, but a number of
enabling factors including social
economic environment, market demands,
consumer readiness, cost effectiveness,
all of which must work together.
Why is big data for
precision medicine important now?
Let's see.
An important aspect of precision
medicine is to utilize
an individual's genetic profile for
his or her own diagnoses and treatment.
Analyzing the human genome,
which holds the key to human health
is rapidly becoming more affordable.
Today's cost to sequence a genome is less
than 10% of what it
cost just back in 2008.
But, human genomic data is big.
How big?
In a perfect world, just the three
billion letters of your genome
would require about 700
megabytes to store.
In the real world, meaning the kind of
data generated from genome sequencing
machines, we need 200GB to store a genome.
And it takes now about
a day to sequence a genome.
We are finally beginning to create more
electronic records that can be stored and
manipulated in digital media.
Most doctors offices and hospitals now
use electronic health record systems
which contain all details of
a patient's visit and lab test.
How big is this data?
As a quick example The Samaritan Medical
Center Watertown New York at 294 that
Community Hospital reported
120 terabytes as of 2013.
The data value more than double
in just the last two years.
So clearly just in a past two years
dramatic changes have prepared the health
care industry to produce and analyze
larger mounts of complex patient data.
To summarize what we have seen so far
the key components of these changes are:
Reduced cost of data generation and
analysis, increased availability of cheap
large data storage, and they increased
digitization of previously paper records.
But we need one more capability to advance
toward the promised land of individualized
health care practices.
We need to combine various types of
data produce by different groups in
a meaningful way.
Let's look at this issue from
the same point of view as Ilka did.
With her discussion of how big data
can help with wildfire analytics.
The key is the integration of
multiple types of data sources.
Data from sensors,
organizations and people.
In the next few slides,
we look at each of these, and
then I'll share a story about some of the
new and really exciting ways people data
especially has the potential to
change healthcare big data landscape.
Let's start with sensor data.
Sure, digital hospital equipment
have been producing sensor data for
years, but it was unlikely that
the data was ever stored or
shared, let alone
analyzed retrospectively.
These were intended for
real-time use, to inform healthcare
professionals, and then got discarded.
Now we have many more sensors and
deployment.
And many more places
that are capturing and
explicitly gathering information
to be stored and analyzed.
Let's just take a new kind of data
that's increasingly becoming
common in our daily lives.
Fitness devices are everywhere now
their sales have skyrocketed
in the last few years.
They are in wristbands, watches, shoes and
vests, directly communicating with your
personal mobile device, tracking several
activity variables like blood pressure,
different types of activities,
blood glucose levels, etc at every moment.
Their goal is to improve wellness.
By having you monitor
your daily status and
hopefully improve your
lifestyle to stay healthy.
But the data they generate can be
very useful medical information
because this data is about what
happens in your normal life and
not just when you go to the doctor.
How much data do they generate?
The device called FitBit can
produce several gigabytes a day.
Could this data be used to save healthcare
costs, effect a healthier lifestyle?
That's a question mark.
It's safe to guess that this data
alone wouldn't drive the dream of
precision medicine.
But what if we consider integrating
it with other sources of data
like electronic health records or
a genomic profile?
This remains an open question.
This is an open arena for research that
my colleagues at scripts are doing.
It's also a potentially significant area
for product and business development.
Let's look at some examples of health
related data being generated by
organizations.
Many public databases
including those curated and
managed by NCBI, the National Center for
Biotechnology Information,
had been created to capture the basic
scientific data and knowledge for
humans and other model organisms at
the different building blocks of life.
These databases carry both experimental
and computed data that are necessary to
observations for
unconquered diseases like cancer.
In addition,
many have created knoweledge-bases
like the Geneontology and
The Unified Medical Language System
to assemble human knowledge in
a machine processable form.
These are just a few examples of
organizational data sources and
governmental data gathered by health
care systems around the world
could also be used as a massive
source of information.
But really some of
the most interesting and
novel opportunities seem likely to come
from the area of people generated data.
Mobile healths apps is an area
that is growing significantly.
There are apps now to monitor heart rates,
blood pressure, and
test oxygen saturation levels.
Apps, we might say,
record data from sensors but
are also obviously generated from people.
But there is more people generated
data that's interesting beyond censure
measurements.
In 2015 the Webby People's Voice Award
went to an app which supports
meditation and mindfulness.
Rather than an electronic sensing device,
a human would indicate how many
minutes per day they spent meditating.
If they interact with the app
which reminds them to be mindful,
then we have human generated behavior
that we couldn't get from a sensor.
There are well over 100,000 health apps
today in either iTunes or Google Play.
And by some estimates
the Mobile Health App market
may be worth 27 billion dollars by 2017.
So really we are just seen the beginning
of what data might be generated here
from what's being called human sensors,
but to really understand where the power
of people generated data might take us
in the era of big data for healthcare.
Let's imagine how things stand now.
In general,
a patient goes to see their doctor and
maybe their doctor asks if they have had
any side effects from their medications.
The accuracy and
hence the quality of data patients provide
in this kind of setting is very low.
Not that it's really the patients fault.
It might have been days or
weeks ago that they experienced something.
They may be unsure whether something
they experienced was actually a reaction
to then report it.
And there might be details about exactly
when they took a medication that
are meaningful, but
they've forgotten it after the fact.
Today, people are self reporting reactions
and experiences they are having.
We're on Twitter, on blog sites,
online support groups,
online data sharing services: these
are sources of data that we've
never had before that can be used to
understand in a far more detailed and
personal rate the impact of drug
integrations are responses to certain
If applications were designed
to integrate doctor and
hospital records with information
on when drugs were taken and
then to further mine social media or
collect self reports from patients.
Who knows what kinds of questions
we will be able to answer?
Or new questions we may be able to ask?